Hi everyone [inaudible]
I'm an assistant professor
at Stanford University in
the Computer Science department,
where we think about
reinforcement learning for
high-stakes scenarios
particularly focusing
on applications that we
hope can benefit society.
What I'm excited to
talk to you about
today is batch
reinforcement learning.
But before we get started,
I want to start with
a brief motivation
of saying that the tale
of two hamburgers.
Back in the 1980s,
there's a fast food chain
called A&W that is popular in
the United States
that was trying to
compete with the Quarter
Pounder of McDonald's,
which is one of the most
popular hamburgers.
So they thought they would
introduce the Third Pounder.
The taste tests for great,
the beef was good and they
launched it and the
product failed.
Unfortunately, even though the
price of the Third Pounder
was roughly similar to the
price of the Quarter Pounder,
people thought that
they were getting
less beef because three
is less than four.
So I think this illustrates
why mathematics education
is extremely important.
When I heard about this story
and when I started to think about
reinforcement learning and
its potential
obligations to society,
education seemed like a
really compelling example.
So together with my colleagues
are on top of [inaudible]
a graduates students,
we were thinking about how we
could better teach
more fractions,
hopefully in a way
that was engaging,
effective, and efficient.
The game that you're seeing right
now is called Refraction
and it's being played by
hundreds of thousands
of students.
But one of the big
challenges we had was
to think about what
is the sequence of
activities student
should do to keep them
engaged and motivated and
make sure they were Learning.
So for example, we can think of
this as a decision policy,
where based on the sequence of
interactions with the game
that student has so far,
what is the next
activity to give them
in order to maximize
somehow come we care about.
This reward function
could be something like
persistence or the amount
that they've learned.
In particular, in our case,
these are optional
learning environments.
So we are really
interested in trying
to maximize student persistence.
We started thinking
about this about
five years ago and it made
me really interested
in the problem I'm
going to tell you
about briefly today.
But I want to highlight
here that I'm
certainly not the first
one to have thought about
doing reinforcement learning for
applications that could
hopefully benefit society.
Really since the very start
of reinforcement learning,
which we can trace back to
things like multi-arm bandits,
as you've heard about
recently from the 1940s.
There's been a parallel
legacy of thinking about
reinforcement learning to
try to benefit humans,
starting with things like
teaching machines and
then moving on to things like
adaptive clinical trials.
Now, I think this is both really
exciting in terms of its
societal impact but it
also introduces a lot of
foundational questions or
reinforcement learning.
In particular, if we
think about some of
the extraordinary successes in
reinforcement learning right now,
they have tended to
be in areas like
robotics or game-playing
and in those scenarios,
we typically have
access to a simulator,
where we can try
things out and even if
our agent fails to
learn for a long time,
as long as it learns
eventually, we're happy.
In contrast, if we think about
domains that involve
interacting with people,
we unfortunately
do not get to have
great simulators of how
people learn or behave,
which means that we have
to rely on real data.
But this is challenging because
that real data
involves interacting
real humans which
means that we need to
be careful about the
data we collect.
So one of the key
questions that I think
about and together with
my students and my lab,
is how do we develop
reinforcement learning
techniques to
try to minimize
the amount of data
an agent would need to learn
and what are the
fundamental limits of
how much information any agent
would need to learn to
make good decisions.
I think that if we could
answer these questions,
not only will we make
foundational improvements
to reinforcement learning,
but also we'll be able
to help more people.
So I first just want
to talk briefly
about a quick refresher
on MDP background.
I think you're familiar with
the notions of states
and actions and
next states as well as
dynamics models and rewards.
What I want to think about today,
is the counterfactual case.
The idea that we're
going to be getting
data from the past perhaps
executed from a particular
behavior policy and we want to
use that data in order to try
to make better decisions
going forward.
Now, this is a challenging
problem for a lot of reasons.
In particular involves us
thinking about what if reasoning?
Essentially you can
imagine that we
have an agent who's
made sequences of
decisions in the past and got
some outcomes and maybe it's
done this not just once,
but a number of times.
Now, one of the challenges
is you can never know what
your life would have
been like if you
weren't watching this
video right now.
That's the counterfactual
and you can never
experience it and so
that's a key challenge
when we try to think about
using old data to try
to make better different
decisions in their paycheck.
In particular, just like you
saw and multi-arm bandits,
we have sensory data.
We can't see what
an alternative action
would have resulted in,
what the rewards are that
we would have obtained.
So this is a challenge that even
comes up and multi-armed bandits.
But when we think about using
old data digitally in
reinforcement learning,
we actually have an
additional challenge
which is the issue
of generalization.
So if you think about
an agent making
not just one decision but
a sequence of decisions,
then the combinatorial
possibility policies
increases with the horizon.
So if we want to be
able to generalize from
our past data to think about
what might happen
under sequences of
actions we've never
experienced before,
we're going to need some
way to do generalization.
Now there are a number
of us that are really
excited about these
problems of how to use
old data to make better decisions
in the future and it's very
closely related to things like
causal reasoning and
counterfactual reasoning.
These communities
have a long history
in other areas like
in statistics,
epidemiology, and other
aspects of Computer Science.
But really over the
last few years,
there's has been a turn
of excitement over
trying to combine
these ideas with
machine learning methods and
reinforcement learning in
order to have more impact.
So what I think that many
of us would really
love to be able to do
is do what's often called
counterfactual or batch
reinforcement learning.
Where you take all data,
we learn a new policy from it,
in a way that we
know what that value
will be when we deploy
it in the picture.
This is going to involve
both doing policy evaluation
or ability to be able
to evaluate how good
an alternative policy would be
as well as policy
optimization where we
take a max or an arg max
over that set of possible
policies we considered.
I want to first talk briefly
about policy evaluation question.
I want to highlight that there's
a huge literature on doing
this often called treatment
effect estimation
from other communities.
People in econometrics
have thought about
this extensively with things like
how can you evaluate
whether or not
a treatment is better
than a control decision.
But again, when we think
about sequences of decisions,
we run into a challenge.
This is a recent very nice paper
from some of my colleagues
[inaudible] and what it
illustrates is some of
the challenges that
come up when you
start to use old data to
try to make new decisions.
In particular, imagine if you
have a set of patients
who've been treated in
a particular way and
now you want to think
about a particular sequence
of ways to treat them.
So as we make decisions,
as we do things like
choose whether or not to
ventilate a patient or
choose whether or
not to use sedation,
the number of previous
patients who had
a particular sequence of
interventions or
particular sequence
of actions is going
to be quite small
and so even if we start off with
quite a large amount of data,
say a 100,000 patients which
is a reasonable number,
we might only end up with
say a few 100 patients who
actually have received treatments
that match the
policy that we model
evaluate and essentially we can
think of this as challenge of
co-variant shift that when
we have different policies,
those are generally
going to be taking
different actions and
those different actions
going to lead to
different state distributions and
we really want to think
about what would happen in
terms of the resulting
rewards under
those differing state
and action distributions
that we expect to encounter.
To try to tackle this problem of
this distribution mismatches
important cycling,
which you recently heard about.
So just as a refresher,
an important sampling
we can think
about the value of a policy as
being the probability of
observing a particular
trajectory.
Right now I'm thinking about
the finite horizon case.
So we can think of
the probability of
generating particular
trajectories stays and actions,
the reward of that particular
trajectory and then
averaging that over all the
trajectories in latency.
What important sampling
allows us to do,
as you saw previously,
is that we can use data that was
generated from a
different policy and
re-weigh it so that we can
get a correct expectation.
One of the beautiful
aspects of this
is that we don't
actually have to know
the dynamics model of
the world because
the dynamic model of
the world is the same in
the numerator and the
denominator so it cancels.
There's been a lot of
exciting work in this area.
Since this was first part of
a reinforcement learning and it's
a key tool for policy
evaluation because we
couldn't use it to take
existing old data and use it to
evaluate under
certain assumptions,
what would be the value
of an alternative policy.
Now I just want to highlight that
there are some challenges with
using importance sampling
to do policy evaluation.
Important sampling provides us
with an unbiased estimator,
but it typically can
be very high variance.
In fact in the previous work,
we illustrated that the variance
can scale sometimes
exponentially with
the horizon and so
that means if we don't
have a lot of data or
the horizon is long,
that these estimators
may be very poor
approximators of how good
our new policy might
do in the feature.
An alternative is to use things
like parametric
models which you've
heard about a little bit in
terms of the MDP
planning sections.
So these models can
have bias because
sometimes the function
approximators we're using or
the models specification
we've chosen is not correct.
It doesn't match really how
the role generates data.
But they can have
very low variance
in return for some bias.
So one of the exciting
innovations we've seen over
the last few years is
the idea of doubly
robust estimators,
an idea that comes from
statistics but has been
ported over to reinforcement
learning abundance
for the last 10 years
and the idea is
that can combine between the
best of these two worlds.
Combining model-based
estimators with
important sampling in order to
get lower variance
and lower bias.
So this is a way for us to try.
All these illustrations are
the types of ways we could
do policy evaluation
and the thing that we really like
to do is to do policy
optimization on top.
We have recent work
that suggests that
we can use these
types of ideas like
importance sampling
in order to actually
make better decisions
going forward.
In particular, here I show
an illustration from cart-pole.
The bottom line is showing us how
good the current
behavior policy is
and by using these
advanced techniques
by building on an assembly,
you can actually do
policy optimization and
learn far better policies
that we were using to
actually collect the data
and I think this is
very exciting in terms
of the potential increases we can
do by using these
types of techniques.
Now this is just one step.
I think that there's
a huge amount of
growth and open
questions about how
did we really solve this
problem particularly if
we want formal guarantees
on performance.
In my lab, we've been doing
a lot of work on the issues
of policy evaluation,
policy optimization,
and trying to start
deriving formal balance so
that we can be confident when
we deploy these policies,
and there's also a lot
of really exciting work
being done by my colleagues
in these types of areas.
So I think we have a long
way to go but before I
close I want to give us
a reason for optimism,
which is if we go back
to the example that I
said at the beginning of
looking at refraction,
our goal there was to
figure out if we could
use old data from about 11,000
students to figure out if
there's a better way to
teach people and keep
them more engaged.
We used a method derived by
important sampling
to get a policy that
we thought would do
about 30 percent
better in terms of
increasing persistence.
We ran that study with
another 2,000 students and
we've found that
indeed it increased by
about 30 to 32 percent.
I think this is really
exciting, this illustration,
that sometimes we can predict
the future accurately
with these types
of methods and we really can
make a difference. Thanks.